ECG Arrhythmia Detector1 Overview

The electrocardiogram (ECG) is a recording of the surface potentials generated by the
electric activity of the heart. The heart muscle is driven by a series of electric waves
which causes various chambers to contract, the signature of which can be picked up at
the body surface. The recording and interpretation of ECG signals has a long history,
and is an indispensable tool in assessing the normal cardiac status and overall health
of humans.
In this project, we will be exploring various heart rhythms in terms of their fre-
quency content. We will devise methods, based on the frequency morphology of ECG
signals, to be used in monitoring systems for distinguishing normal and abnormal
rhythms.

2 The Electrocardiogram
2.1 ECG Beat Morphology

The normal heart rhythm starts as an electric impulse generated in a group of neurons
located in the right atrium known as the sinoatrial note (SA). This impulse is then
spread as an electric wave across the atria to arrive at another neuron group, the
atrioventricular node (AV) around 200 msec later. This node links the atria to the
ventricle. After approximately 100 msec, it initiates another electric wave on the
other side (ventricle) which spreads into the whole ventricular chamber causing its
activation within 80 msec.
The series of activations and waves correspond to specific signatures in the ECG.
The ECG waveform accordingly consists of three distinct temporal waves: the P wave,
the QRS complex, and the T wave. The P wave corresponds to the activation of the
two atria and is roughly about 0.2 mV in amplitude. The QRS complex corresponds
to the activation or depolarization of the two ventricles and is a peak-shaped wave of
amplitude around 1mV. Finally, the T-wave corresponds to the repolarization of the
ventricles in preparation for a new beat cycle. This wave varies across subjects, but
it usually has an amplitude of 0.1-0.3 mV and lasts for around 400 msec after a QRS
complex. Note that there is a period of relative silence between the QRS and the T
wave, called the ST period which occurs just before polarization.
Looking at the most distinctive templates of an ECG signal, the QRS complex
is invariably the easiest to detect, and as such, is the main focus of a wide range of
algorithms used in ECG signal detection and analysis.
The frequency content of an ECG signal has an approximate bandwidth. In
principle, most of the clinically relevant information is located between 0.1 and 45 Hz.
Note, however, that the signal energy distribution across frequency might not always
be the correct feature in an ECG signal, since important morphological features might
contain little energy. In these cases resorting to time templates might be important.


2.2 Eﬀect of noise

It is fortunate that an ECG signal has a very distinctive shape, and relatively limited
frequency bandwidth. Therefore, unwanted noise can be filtered out with relative
ease. While noise can be low when recording from patients at rest, motion can
introduce large amounts of low frequency base-line wander due to electrode motion.
In addition, one should always take into consideration the line power noise (60 Hz).
In fact, the latter does not have to be a pure tone, rather harmonics of 60 Hz (120,
180 etc).


2.3 Heart Arrhythmias

The term arrhythmia refers to an irregularity in the heart rhythm. Most irregularities
are usually associated to electrical problems (wave generation and propagation from
diﬀerent nodes) thus leading to abnormal mechanical activity in the heart muscle.
Arrhythmias are categorized based on the location of the abnormal electric ac-
tivity. The normal sinus rhythm (regular ECG) originates from the SA node in the
atrium. Abnormalities occur when other electric activity originates from other points
of focus, in the atrium, ventricle or the Atrioventricular node (AV). Arrhythmias can
consist of isolated abnormal beats, sequences of abnormal and normal beats, or purely
abnormal beats. Clinically, the severity of an abnormality is assessed by how severely
it aﬀects the normal operation of the heart (and thus aﬀects blood circulation and
oxygenation levels of the body). While isolated abnormal beats do not aﬀect the
overall operation, they do indicate an underlying pathology that needs to be treated.
heart rhythms dominated by abnormal beats require quick intervention through med-
ication to correct those. Finally, the most severe continuous arrhythmias can be fatal
if no immediate treatment is given.
Ventricular flutter (VFL) and Ventricular fibrillation (VF) are two of the most
dangerous arrhythmias. VFL is caused by a focus in the ventricular neurons firing
very fast, at a rate of 200-300 spikes/minute. Therefore, VFL causes the heart muscle
to contract at this high rate, so that there is not enough time for the heart muscle
to fill with blood, thus reducing the cardia output drastically. VFL is a precursor
for VF, in that as the blood supply to the heart reduces during an episode of VFL,
many other foci in the ventricle start to fire independently. As the heart goes to
VF, all these ventricular foci start firing at will, going out of synchrony with their
surrounding and thus lead to a twitching of the cardiac muscle and cutting of the
cardiac output. VF thus is very severe and must be treated with electric shocks to
reset the heart rhythm to its normal state.


2.4 Automated detection of arrhythmias

The seriousness of abnormal heart rhythms have caused a flurry of automated moni-
toring systems to help detect the occurrence, and possible alarm against the possibility
of occurrence of such rhythms.
An automated monitoring system is typically continuously recording surface ECG
potentials which are then amplified, lowpass filtered and digitized before being pro-
cessed on a computer. At this stage, a variety of signal processing techniques can
be employed to reduce noise and increase the detectability of normal and abnormal
graphoelements of the ECG. In general, the sensitivity of a monitoring systems to
abnormalities, especially the life threatening ones, is of utmost importance. In such
cases (VFL, VF), an alarm must be sound for immediate intervention. As an en-
gineering, detection of arrhythmia is a typical one: increasing sensitivity so that in
case of an actual VF or VFL an alarm is sound, while keeping false alarms (false
detections) to a minimum. False alarms can reduce the hospital staﬀ confidence in
the machine, thus possibly ignoring potentially real alarms.
In this project, you will design digital filtering techniques to reduce noise in
recorded ECG signals. You will also design and test frequency based methods to
distinguish VF from normal heart rhythms and noise.
